---
layout: post
title: Finding things
---

The `find` command is the utility to, well, find files. You give it a file name and a starting directory, and it will recursively search for files with the given name, and show their paths as output. For example:

```console
$ find . -name myfile.txt
somedirectory/myfile.txt
anotherdirectory/myfile.txt
```

(where `.` in the example is the current directory. `$` indicates the prompt, to separate the command from its output.).

`find` might feel a bit of an odd command, since it uses long options with just a single dash `-`, but perhaps more so, because it only requires one mandatory argument: a directory name. The name of the file(s) you are looking for, is an option. If you don't supply the `-name` option, `find` will just list all the files and directories it encounters, recursively. Somewhat similar to `ls -R`, but here, files will have full path names.

```console
$ find .
.
./somefile.txt
./emptydirectory
somedirectory/myfile.txt
somedirectory/anotherfile.txt
anotherdirectory/anotherfile.txt
anotherdirectory/myfile.txt
```

Note that the output is not alphabetically ordered: you should regard the output from `find` as to be in random order. Also, it doesn't make a clear difference between files and directories (or devices, or nodes etc).

What `find` does do, is iterate through each file one by one, in random order. This can be of an advantage, because while a plain `ls` will list all the files, trying to use `ls *.txt` to list all the text files, will break down for a very large number of files (it's not so much `ls` that breaks down, but it still imposes a limit on `ls). `find` doesn't suffer from this, and will happily print out the paths of the files one by path.

To actually find such text files, or rather, files by their extension, you can pass glob patterns to `find`. To avoid these being expanded by the shell, you'll have to escape or quote them. Thus:

```console
$ find . -name "*.txt"
```

will find all those hundreds of thousands of text files, recursively, in the current directory.

I mention "the current directory", because the directory name can also be a path to another directory. If that is a relative path, `find` will list the resultant file paths as relative, and if it's an absolute path, all paths listed are absolute.

Examples:

```console
$ find .. -name myfile.txt
../somedirectory/myfile.txt
../amotherdirectory/myfile.txt
```

and for absolute paths:

```console
$ find /home/evert -name myfile.txt
/home/evert/somedirectory/myfile.txt
/home/evert/amotherdirectory/myfile.txt
```

`find` can also do case insensitive searches, with `-iname`, like `find . -iname myFILE.txt`.


### File types

`find` can also limit itself to file types, such as files, directories, symbolic links (for another post) and a few other types. Use the `-type` option, followed by a letter: `f` for a normal file, `d` for a directory, `l` for a symbolic link. So to skip that empty directory from a previous example:

```console
./somefile.txt
./somedirectory/anotherfile.txt
./somedirectory/myfile.txt
./amotherdirectory/anotherfile.txt
./amotherdirectory/myfile.txt
```

(Note that also the current directory, `.`, is skipped.)

### Find by creation or modification timestamp

`find` also allows you find files by their timestamp. Every file in Linux has a timestamp, which is its last modification date and time. You can use this to find recent files. Use the `-newermt` (`mt` stands for modification time) with a date string. For the toy example created above, I can use:

```console
$ find . -type f -newermt '2020-03-30 20:15'
./anotherdirectory/anotherfile.txt
./anotherdirectory/myfile.txt
```

since I updated those files to change their modification time.

### Deletion and execution of found files

If you want to delete the files `find` finds, use the `-delete` opion with it. Remember, you can't revert this operation: there is no trash folder on Linux (or there is on most, but `find` doesn't use it). So the best is to run `find` once with the `-delete` option, then run the same command again, with `-delete`, e.g. `find . -name myfile.txt -delete`.


"Execution of found files" is a misnomer: but you can execute a command, that takes each of the found files (remember, one by one) as input. For example, you could run `cat` on the text files:

```console
$ find . -type f -name "*.txt" -exec cat {} \;
```

This will execute `cat` for every file found. The `{}` part stands in for the file's path (which is input to `cat`), and the semi-colon `;` terminates the command given to `-exec`: it needs a backslash to be escaped, otherwise the shell will likely interpret, instead of `find -exec`.

If you run it like this, find will not output the file names, just their contents (because that is what `cat` does). To also print the file name, just above the contents of that file, use the `-print` option:

```console
$ find . -type f -name "*.txt" -exec cat {} \; -print
```

And no, if you use `-print` without the `-exec` option, the file paths will no be printed double. You could the `-print` option "absorbs" the normal output of `find` (which would be the file paths), and adds its own.



### locate

There is a completely other tool to help you find files. It uses a database that gets indexed regularly, which means you don't have to recurse through directories. It is what you usually come across on an operating system's gui, if you want to search for files (like Spotlight on MacOS). The tool is called `locate`, but it may not be installed by default. You can install it through your package manager (simply search for `locate`; its description should mention a database, and possibly even the accompanying command `updatedb`). Or you could install it on the command line with

(Debian, Ubuntu, Tails)

```console
$ sudo apt install locate
```

(Red Hat, Fedora)

```console
$ sudo dnf install locate
```

But `sudo` and `apt/dnf` are still to be discussed later.


`locate` will regularly run `updatedb` behind the scenes, to index all files and update its database. Therefore, the first time, the database is empty or minimally filled, and it will not yet work properly. But once indexed, it's very fast and easy to use. You just supply it (part of) the file name you are looking for. For example:

```console
$ locate myfile.txt
/home/evert/somedirectory/myfile.txt
/home/evert/anotherdirectory/myfile.txt
```

Note that `locate` does not use globbing patterns: it just takes its input as a string, and tries to match that with what is inside its database. In contrast to not being able to use a globbing pattern: you can just use part of the filename instead: `locate myfile` will find any path with the string `myfile` in it, including directory names or files with different extensions.

