---
layout: post
title: Searching in text files
---

`grep` is a utility that lets you find things, like words or just any string of characters, inside files. Most of the times, these will be text files, where text files may be anything that can be opened in a text editor: it doesn't have to be plain text, an HTML file or CSV file would also work. It can potentially work on binary files as well, but that's certainly not recommended.

`grep` in its simplest form just requires you to give two command line arguments: the string to search for, and the file name. It will then show you if and where it matches the file. For example, for the Markdown text file of this post, it looks somewhat like this:

```console
$ grep two grep.md
`grep` in its simplest form just requires you to give two command line arguments: the string to search for, and the file name. It will then show you if and where it matches the file. For example, for the Markdown text file of this post, it looks somewhat like this:
```

It outputs the full line containg the matched string. (There's a bit of paradox, or recursion problem, in the output here. I'll leve that to the reader to ponder.)

If you want to see the line number (convenient for long files), add the `-n` option.

`grep` is usually used with multiple files: this searches for the relevant string amongst a list of files, to see which matches. Doing that yields output with filenames:

```console
$ grep -n two *.md
grep.md:5:`grep` in its simplest form just requires you to give two command line arguments [...]
```

(I've shortened the output above.)

`grep` has a few more interesting options. There are the `-A` (after) and `-B` (before) options, which each take a number as argument, and shows you that amount of lines after or before the match. This is very convenient in case you want some context for your matches.

`grep -V` reverses the match: any line that does *not* match the search string, is shown instead. I often use this to pipe some output through `grep`, for example as follows:

```console
$ ps | grep -v ps
  PID TTY          TIME CMD
 6252 pts/1    00:00:00 zsh
 6661 pts/1    00:00:00 grep
```

Without the `grep -v grep` part, there would possibly be a third line, showing the `ps` command as well. Of course, you can further pipe that, to get rid of the `grep` line as well, and just show all the other processes in that terminal: `ps | grep -v ps | grep -v grep`. The reverse here also works: `ps | grep zsh` would show you the line with just the zsh command; easier. But for that, there is even `pgrep zsh`: it will "grep" all processes by that name, and just show their PIDs. Note that `pgrep` also shows processes in other terminals, or any process owned by the user.


`grep` has one more interesting option: its search string can be a regular expression. These behave a bit like globbing patterns, although they can be much more complex. Plus, the behaviour of `*` and `?` is somewhat different. Regular expressions area still be to discussed, but to give a very quick rundown:

- `?` means the *previous* character can occur once or zero times.
- `*` means the *previous* character can occur zero or more times.
- `.` means any character. Thus, `.*` means no characters, any one, two, three or more characters. Basically anything.
- `+` means the *previous* character can occur one or more times.
- Character sets are the same as for globbing patterns: `[A-Z]` matches any character between `A` and `Z`, `[^0-9]` matches anything *but* a number, and so on.

If you need to grep for one of the special characters above, escape them with a backslash. Usually, you already want to put a regular expression in single quotes, and then the special characters are still special here.

Since there are, evolved over the course of history, multiple variations of regular expressions, use the `-E` option (extended regular expressions), or the `egrep` command instead. For example,

```console
$  grep -E 'str[io]ng +' *.txt
```

matches the string "string", or "strong", followed by one or more spaces. A string "strong" followed by a comma, newline or period would not match.


`grep` can do recursive searches as well, using the `-r` option. If you give it no output, it would normally read the standard input (which is useful when you use pipes, as in the example above), but with the recursive option, it recursively searches through the current directory. You can also give it a directory path with the `-r` option, to search through that directory and its subdirectories.


### Alternatives

The past 10 years or so, a number of alternatives to `grep` have entered the Linux sphere. In what I believe the historical order, the most notable are `ack`, `ag` and `rg`. Their packages tend to be named `ack-grep`, `silversearcher-ag` and `ripgrep`, if you like to install them and try them out.

They have some extra utilities, and can be faster than `grep`. Most notably, they can search by file *type* (or some attempt at that), instead of glob patterns. Thus you wouldn't need `grep somestring *.txt *.text`, but something like `ag searchstring -t` (`-t` indicating all text files). And it would do this recursively as well.

I won't list the details here; feel free to install them and play around with them. I've focused on `grep`, since that is still the most common, and installed by default nearly everywhere.
