---
layout: post
title: Globbing
---

### Wildcards: * and ?

You can get a selection of files using so-called globbing patterns, which allow for a special character to stand in for one or more characters. This is done by the shell, so it is a bit shell dependent. Several standards, however, have merged over time.

First up are `*` and `?`: `*` matches zero or more of any character. This means `ls *` will just all the files in current directory, just as it does without argument. In this case, however, the shell has first expanded the `*` to all files *and* directories, and feeds that to `ls`, which will list all of its inputs one by one. As a result, it now lists the contents of directories as well (but not recursively). Also of note is that *hidden* files, files starting with a dot, are *not* listed: `*` does not expand hidden files; you would need to use `ls .*` for that (note that now, there is no need to use the `-a` option of `ls`).

Globbing doesn't work just with `ls`, since it's a shell operation. For example, if you want to list the output of all text files, assuming they have an extension `.txt`, you could do `cat *.txt`. And if there also `.text` files, just put two patterns there: `cat *.txt *.text`. The shell will expand both patterns to a list of files, and `cat` will see a, possibly lengthy, list of files as its input.

`?` means any character, but not zero characters (or more than one). So if you had files named `file1.txt`, `file2.txt`, ..., `file9.txt`, you could do `cat file?.txt`. But this wouldn't work if you had another `file10.txt`. Tip if you ever need to create hundreds or more of similarly named files: use zero-filling numbers, e.g., `file001.txt`, `file002.txt` etc. Use a good estimate of how many files there ever may be: an extra zero doesn't hurt too much, and for operations such as `cat file00??.txt` this can be much more convenient. Also, files will be easier to sort by their names this way.


Note: if you are used to the Windows Command Prompt, or even DOS, you may be used to using `dir *.*` to list all the files. This is not necessary in Linux, and will even miss out files, since this will require files that are listed to have a dot in their name.


### Character sets

The listing of numbered files earlier can be made clearer, since most shells allow the use of character sets: these are a string of characters between square brackets, `[]`, which indicate which (single) character is allowed there. So, `ls file[123456789].txt` could also work. That is obviously not easier than `ls file?.txt`, even though it is safer (because it excludes files like `fileA.txt` or `file_.txt`. But character sets can also be specified using ranges, as follows: `ls file[1-9].txt`. That is both clearer and safer, and practically as short, as `ls file?.txt`. 

Multiple ranges can be specified after each other, and the pattern `[A-Za-z0-9]` is not uncommon (sometimes followed by a single underscore: `[A-Za-z0-9_]`). Since the dash `-` is used to indicate a range, using the dash itself as a valid character requires attention: put it at the start of the character set, where it simply can't mean a range. Thus, `[-A-Za-z0-9_]` is quite common, since this includes all simple filenames.

Character sets can also be inverted, by starting the character set with a `^`: `file[^0-9].txt` are all text files called file?.txt that do not contain a number.

But be careful making your globbing patterns too specific: if you do that, you may want to rethink how you are dealing with your files.

Note that character sets are dependent on the shell, just as `*` and `?`. Character sets, however, are a bit less widespread in usage. So this may not work in every shell.


### Escaping globbing characters

The disadvantage of this (automated) globbing by the shell is that files with an actual asterisk, question mark or square bracket in their name, can't be typed in the usual way: the shell will first attempt to expand the globbing pattern, meaning multiple files may be included. To escape globbing patterns, you can either quote them, or escape them with a backslash.

- backslash escape: prepend the special character with a single `\`. The same, by the way, holds true for spaces in a file name: put a `\` before the space(s).

- quote the file name, with double quotes: surround the file name with double quotes: "file?.txt" is the literal filename with a question mark. The advantage or disadvantage of double quotes is that variables, in particular environment variables, can be expanded inside them. Environment variables are a topic for another day, but a standard environment variable is `HOME`, which contains the value of the user's home directory, e.g., `/home/evert` (on MacOS, this would be `/Users/evert`). Then, `"$HOME/file?.txt"` would be `"/home/evert/file?.txt"`. Note the use of a dollar sign to get the variable contents. 

  As with the backslash escape, this also works for spaces in variable names.
  
- quote the file name, with single quotes: 'file?.txt'. This works the same as with double quotes, *except* that environment variables are *not* expanded: `'$HOME/file?.txt'` would stay the literal string `'$HOME/file?.txt'`. And this also works the same way for spaces.

