---
layout: post
title: Environment variables
published: false
---

Environment variables are settings (more or less) that define some behaviour of your shell, and thus the environment of the shell, and more specifically, the shell commands. Other commands (programs) can also environment variables, but they may also choose to ignore them.

Environment variables, or short, "envvars", have a name (usually all upper case), like `HOME`, and a value, like `/home/evert` (my user account's home directory). This, for examples, makes the `cd` command (without arguments) go to my home directory. (You can change `HOME` and it will go to that new directory, but it is *highly* recommended to *not* tamper with `HOME`).

You can view an envvar using the `printenv` command:

```console
$ printenv HOME
/home/evert
```

or simply with the `echo` command:

```console
$ echo $HOME
/home/evert
```

Note the use of the '$' sign here, to indicate it is a variable whose value we want to echo, not the variable name itself.

You can list all currently defined envvars with the `env` command. Variables of note in the output list are possibly:

- `HOME`: the current account's home directory
- `PATH`: a list of paths, which are used to look up where programs (such as `find` or `grep`) may live. More about `PATH` elsewhere.
- `PROMPT`: a formatting string that makes the prompt shown on each line before user input.
- `EDITOR`: the default editor that will open for some actions that require editing a (temporary) text file. Mine is set to `emacs`; if not preset, it often defaults to `vi` or `vim`.
- `SHELL`: your current shell, or rather, the full path to the shell.
- `PAGER`: the default pager that is used for output that is displayed one terminal page (window height) at a time. Mine is set to `less`, and a related envvar `LESS` defines some additional options for `less` to use.
- `DISPLAY`: this defines what "display", or windows environment, commands that are started from the command line, should connect to (in case they have a graphical part to them). Usually, this is `:0.0`, which is the default display, and changing this value will do either nothing, or prevent gui programs from running properly. On multi-user, multi-machine systems, this does make it possible to run a program (at least the gui part) on another machine than where it was started from (provided that machine allows permission). This makes it possible to a server let several people run programs on it, while the graphical interface is shown on their local desktop: all the computation is done elsewhere, but the user interaction is done locally on their machine.

Most envvars, you do not want to change. `PATH` is the most notable for being adjusted, mostly by adding an adding an extra directory path to it. `EDITOR` and `PROMPT` may be other envvars to change.

